Constant buffers language spec - initial draft (#419)
microsoft/hlsl-specs: specs/language/resources.tex

reference to a constant buffer that can be associated with a global buffer when
assigned. The reference must be resolvable to a unique global buffer declaration
before use.

\p Constant buffers cannot be implicitly nor explicitly cast from one type to
another. This means that local \texttt{ConstantBuffer} can only be assigned from
\texttt{ConstantBuffer} with the same template type \texttt{T}.

\Sub{Constant Buffer Layout}{Resources.cnbuf.lay}

\p Constant buffer is arranged like an array of 16-byte rows, or 4-component
vectors of 32-bit elements. Shader constants are arranged into the buffer in the
order they were declared based on following rules.

\p Specific basic types are packed into the last used row of the buffer if they
fit into the available space, starting at the next available aligned position.
These types include:
\begin{itemize}
\item \textit{scalar types}
\item \textit{vector types}
\item \textit{matrix types} with only one row in \textit{column\_major} storage layout
\end{itemize}

\p If they do not fit the remaining space of the row, they will placed at the
start a new 16-byte aligned row.

> \p Vectors are aligned by the size of a single vector element type.

Reviewer: This doesn't account for the row wrapping right? Shouldn't it be something like:

`Vectors are aligned by the size of a single vector element type unless that alignment results in crossing the 16 byte row boundary, in which case it is aligned to the next row"

\p Aggregate types like arrays and structures are always 16-byte row-aligned. If
the aggregate ends with an element that does not completely fill a row, the
remaining space on the last row may be used by the next value.

\p Individual array elements are always 16-byte row aligned.

\p Matrix types with more than one row in \textit{column\_major} storage layout
and matrix types in \textit{row\_major} storage layout in are aligned to the
16-byte row. Each row in storage layout (each column for \textit{column\_major}
matrix) is aligned to a 16-byte row.

\p Members of structured types used in constant buffers follow these same rules.
Because structures are always 16-byte row-aligned, the offset layout within the
structure is independent of the particular structure instance location.

\Sub{Packoffset annotations}{Resources.cnbuf.po}

\p Shader constants declared in \texttt{cbuffer} declaration group can have an

> optional \texttt{packoffset} annotation added before their \texttt{;} terminal.

Reviewer: Should we add an `If an annotation is added to one shader constant in a declaration group then it must be added to all shader constants in that group`?

\begin{grammar}
  \define{packoffset-annotation}\br
  \terminal{: packoffset(} packoffset-id packoffset-row \opt{packoffset-element} \terminal{)}

  \define{packoffset-id}\textnormal{one of}\br
  \terminal{c C}

  \define{packoffset-row}\br
  digit\br
  packoffset-row digit

  \define{packoffset-element}\br
  \terminal{.} \textit{packoffset-element-id}

  \define{packoffset-element-id}\textnormal{one of}\br
  \terminal{x y z w r g b a}\br
\end{grammar}

\p The \texttt{packoffset} annotation defines specific offset in the constant
buffer where the shader constant is located.

\p The \textit{packoffset-row} number is the index into the array of 16-byte
rows of the constant buffer. Each row treated as a vector of four 32-bit
elements.

\p The \textit{packoffset-element} identifies specific location within the
vector where \texttt{x} or \texttt{r} is the first element of the vector,
\texttt{y} or \texttt{g} is the second one, \texttt{z} or \texttt{b} is the
third one and \texttt{w} or \texttt{a} is the fourth, and last element of the
vector.

> \p Shader constant that has a structure, array or matrix type must always be

Reviewer: I'm guessing the answer is "backwards compatibility" but is there a strong argument against something like 

```
Shader constant that has a structure, array or matrix type must always be
16-byte row-aligned. Therefore it may not specify a packoffset-element
```

My first thought on why not is that it could create "unbalanced" code like
```
  cbuffer MyConstants {
    MyStruct Foo : packoffset(c0);
    float Foo : packoffset(c1.x);
  };
```

but beyond that I'm not sure. Since its necessary to check x/y/z anyways it seems like the change would complicate implementations

In the end, I guess I'd just like to hear your thoughts on why it was picked to be this. Personally I'm torn because I prefer the language consistency of keeping it but also dislike the idea of language feature that does "nothing"

Author: I have no idea why it was done like that. Maybe @tex3d would know?

16-byte row-aligned. It means that if it specifies a
\textit{packoffset-element}, it must have a value of \texttt{x} or \texttt{r}.

\p For example

\begin{HLSL}
  cbuffer MyConstants {
    float2 Pos : packoffset(c1.z);
  };
\end{HLSL}

The \texttt{Pos} shader constant will be located at byte offset \texttt{24} in
the constant buffer \texttt{MyConstants}.

\Sub{Default Constant Buffer}{Resources.cnbuf.defcb}

\p All variables declaration in the global scope are implicitly added to default
constant buffer called \texttt{\$Globals}, unless they are marked
\texttt{static}, \texttt{groupshared}, or declare a resource or array of
resources.

\p Layout rules for a default constant buffer are the same as for a named
\texttt{cbuffer} declaration group.

\p Default constant buffer declarations can have an optional
\textit{resource-binding} annotation with a \textit{register-type} \texttt{c} or
\texttt{C} added before their \texttt{;} terminal. This annotation does not
define a virtual register binding but rather an index into an array of 16-byte
rows that represents the default constant buffer, similar to the
\texttt{packoffset} annotation.

\p For example
\begin{HLSL}

>   float4 CameraPos : register(c2);

Reviewer: Mostly asking for historical context. Why is it called a register in $Globasl but packoffset for the rest?

Author: My guess is there was just a single constant buffer `$Globals` before `cbuffer` blocks and `packoffset` were added, and `register` was an established annotation at that time. So it just got extended with a 'c' value and new meaning.
@tex3d - please correct me if I am wrong! :)

  \textit{cbuffer-declaration-seq cbuffer-declaration}

  \define{cbuffer-declaration}\br
  \textit{variable-declaration}\br
  \textit{namespace-declaration}\br
  \textit{function-declaration}\br
  \textit{record-declaration}\br
  \textit{empty-declaration}
\end{grammar}

\p The name of the \texttt{cbuffer} declaration group cannot be referenced from within the translation unit and is not required to be unique.

\p Variable declarations in the \texttt{cbuffer} declaration group are called \textit{shader constants}.

\p Shader constants can be referenced from anywhere in the translation unit after they are declared by directly using the declaration name. This implies that all shader constants declared in a translation unit must have unique names, even though they might be declared in different \texttt{cbuffer} declaration groups.

\p Variable declarations in the \texttt{cbuffer} declaration group cannot have \texttt{groupshared} or \texttt{static} variable modifiers.

\p Any declaration in the \texttt{cbuffer} declaration group that is not a
\textit{namespace-declaration} or a \textit{variable-declaration} is going to be
processed as if it was declared outside of the group at the

> global scope.

Reviewer 2: I'm trying to think about the relationship we want between namespaces and cbuffers. We got some GAB feedback about namespaces that referenced https://github.com/microsoft/DirectXShaderCompiler/issues/4514, which is wanting to put cbuffers in a namespace, and we similarly have this issue you filed which seeks to support namespaces inside a cbuffer https://github.com/microsoft/DirectXShaderCompiler/issues/7322.

My instinct is that we should make cbuffers only contain variable declarations and disallow namespaces in cbuffers, and instead allow cbuffers in namespaces.

The benefit of that approach is that we don't ever have to restrict what we can put in a namespace because it is enclosed in a cbuffer.

Thoughts?

Reviewer 2: Oh! I think I missed that those issues are worded differently but refer to the same issue.

DXC does allow namespaces in cbuffers (and they work), but not cbuffers in namespaces. I feel like this relationship is backwards.

Author: DXC actually allows cbuffers in namespaces as long as it is not the only thing in the namespace, which is a bug we should fix: https://godbolt.org/z/GaWsPxxa7

I agree that we should make cbuffers only contain variable declarations. I'll update the spec.

     ConstantBuffer(const ConstantBuffer &buf);
     ConstantBuffer &operator=(ConstantBuffer &buf);
  };
\end{HLSL}

\p The \textit{shader constants} are the fields of the class type \texttt{T}.
They can be referenced from anywhere within the translation unit after the
\texttt{ConstantBuffer<T>} declaration as if they were fields of the
\texttt{ConstantBuffer<T>} class.

\p For example:

\begin{HLSL}
  struct MyConstants {
    float4 CameraPos;
  };

  ConstantBuffer<MyConstants> CB;

  float4 getCameraPosition() {
    return CB.CameraPos;
  }
\end{HLSL}

\p The layout rules for constant buffer declared with the
\texttt{ConstantBuffer<T>} syntax are the same as for named \texttt{cbuffer}
declaration groups.

\p \texttt{ConstantBuffer<T>} can be defined at local scope to represent a local
reference to a constant buffer that can be associated with a global buffer when
assigned. The reference must be resolvable to a unique global buffer declaration
before use.

\p Constant buffers cannot be implicitly nor explicitly cast from one type to
another. This means that local \texttt{ConstantBuffer} can only be assigned from
\texttt{ConstantBuffer} with the same template type \texttt{T}.

> \Sub{Constant Buffer Layout}{Resources.cnbuf.lay}

Reviewer 2: We probably shouldn't describe the layout as part of the language. This is really a constraint of DXIL that SPIR-V doesn't have, and we're almost certainly going to want to change this in a future shader model.

The language you've written here is great though. We should take this language and capture it in the DXIL specification.

Author: What about `packoffset` annotations? They are part of the language and define specific offset in the constant
buffer.

\Sec{Constant Buffers}{Resources.cnbuf}

> Constant buffer represent a resource that contains read-only constant data in a specific memory layout.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Constant buffers represent resources that contain read-only constant data in a well-defined memory layout.
```

\Sub{Constant Buffer Declaration Block}{Resources.cnbuf.cb}

> \p Constant buffer can be declared using the \texttt{cbuffer} specifier.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
\p A constant buffer can be declared using the \texttt{cbuffer} specifier.
```

  };
\end{HLSL}

\p The \textit{shader constants} are the fields of the class type \texttt{T}.
They can be referenced from anywhere within the translation unit after the
\texttt{ConstantBuffer<T>} declaration as if they were fields of the
\texttt{ConstantBuffer<T>} class.

\p For example:

\begin{HLSL}
  struct MyConstants {
    float4 CameraPos;
  };

  ConstantBuffer<MyConstants> CB;

  float4 getCameraPosition() {
    return CB.CameraPos;
  }
\end{HLSL}

\p The layout rules for constant buffer declared with the
\texttt{ConstantBuffer<T>} syntax are the same as for named \texttt{cbuffer}
declaration groups.

\p \texttt{ConstantBuffer<T>} can be defined at local scope to represent a local
reference to a constant buffer that can be associated with a global buffer when
assigned. The reference must be resolvable to a unique global buffer declaration
before use.

\p Constant buffers cannot be implicitly nor explicitly cast from one type to
another. This means that local \texttt{ConstantBuffer} can only be assigned from
\texttt{ConstantBuffer} with the same template type \texttt{T}.

\Sub{Constant Buffer Layout}{Resources.cnbuf.lay}

> \p Constant buffer is arranged like an array of 16-byte rows, or 4-component

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
\p A constant buffer is arranged like an array of 16-byte rows, or 4-component
```

  \define{packoffset-element-id}\textnormal{one of}\br
  \terminal{x y z w r g b a}\br
\end{grammar}

\p The \texttt{packoffset} annotation defines specific offset in the constant
buffer where the shader constant is located.

\p The \textit{packoffset-row} number is the index into the array of 16-byte
rows of the constant buffer. Each row treated as a vector of four 32-bit
elements.

\p The \textit{packoffset-element} identifies specific location within the
vector where \texttt{x} or \texttt{r} is the first element of the vector,
\texttt{y} or \texttt{g} is the second one, \texttt{z} or \texttt{b} is the
third one and \texttt{w} or \texttt{a} is the fourth, and last element of the
vector.

\p Shader constant that has a structure, array or matrix type must always be
16-byte row-aligned. It means that if it specifies a
\textit{packoffset-element}, it must have a value of \texttt{x} or \texttt{r}.

\p For example

\begin{HLSL}
  cbuffer MyConstants {
    float2 Pos : packoffset(c1.z);
  };
\end{HLSL}

The \texttt{Pos} shader constant will be located at byte offset \texttt{24} in
the constant buffer \texttt{MyConstants}.

\Sub{Default Constant Buffer}{Resources.cnbuf.defcb}

> \p All variables declaration in the global scope are implicitly added to default
> constant buffer called \texttt{\$Globals}, unless they are marked

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
\p All variable declarations in the global scope are implicitly added to a default
constant buffer called \texttt{\$Globals}, unless they are marked
```
